Add postgres cdc guide to doc (#3557)
ClickHouse/clickhouse-docs: docs/integrations/data-ingestion/clickpipes/postgres/deduplication.md

import Image from '@theme/IdealImage';

Updates and deletes replicated from Postgres to ClickHouse result in duplicated rows in ClickHouse due to its data storage structure and the replication process. This page covers why this happens and the strategies to use in ClickHouse to handle duplicates.

## How does data get replicated? {#how-does-data-get-replicated}

### PostgreSQL logical decoding {#PostgreSQL-logical-decoding}

ClickPipes uses [Postgres Logical Decoding](https://www.pgedge.com/blog/logical-replication-evolution-in-chronological-order-clustering-solution-built-around-logical-replication) to consume changes as they happen in Postgres. The Logical Decoding process in Postgres enables clients like ClickPipes to receive changes in a human-readable format, i.e., a series of INSERTs, UPDATEs, and DELETEs. 

### ReplacingMergeTree {#replacingmergetree}

ClickPipes maps Postgres tables to ClickHouse using the [ReplacingMergeTree](/engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/replacingmergetree) engine. ClickHouse performs best with append-only workloads and does not recommend frequent UPDATEs. This is where ReplacingMergeTree is particularly powerful.

> With ReplacingMergeTree, updates are modeled as inserts with a newer version (`_peerdb_version`) of the row, while deletes are inserts with a newer version and `_peerdb_is_deleted` marked as true. The ReplacingMergeTree engine in background deduplicates/merges data and retains the latest version of the row for a given primary key (id), enabling efficient handling of UPDATEs and DELETEs as versioned inserts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With ReplacingMergeTree, updates are modeled as inserts with a newer version (`_peerdb_version`) of the row, while deletes are inserts with a newer version and `_peerdb_is_deleted` marked as true. The ReplacingMergeTree engine deduplicates/merges data in the background, and retains the latest version of the row for a given primary key (id), enabling efficient handling of UPDATEs and DELETEs as versioned inserts.
```

Below is an example of a CREATE Table statement executed by ClickPipes to create the table in ClickHouse.

```sql
CREATE TABLE users
(
    `id` Int32,
    `reputation` String,
    `creationdate` DateTime64(6),
    `displayname` String,
    `lastaccessdate` DateTime64(6),
    `aboutme` String,
    `views` Int32,
    `upvotes` Int32,
    `downvotes` Int32,
    `websiteurl` String,
    `location` String,
    `accountid` Int32,
    `_peerdb_synced_at` DateTime64(9) DEFAULT now64(),
    `_peerdb_is_deleted` Int8,
    `_peerdb_version` Int64
)
ENGINE = ReplacingMergeTree(_peerdb_version)
PRIMARY KEY id
ORDER BY id;
```

### Illustrative example {#illustrative-example}

The illustration below walks through a basic example of synchronization of a table `users` between PostgreSQL and ClickHouse using ClickPipes.

<Image img={clickpipes_initial_load} alt="Clickpipes initial load" size="lg" border/>

> **Step 1** shows the initial snapshot of the 2 rows in PostgreSQL and ClickPipes performing the initial load of those 2 rows to ClickHouse. If you observe, both rows are copied as-is to ClickHouse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 1** shows the initial snapshot of the 2 rows in PostgreSQL and ClickPipes performing the initial load of those 2 rows to ClickHouse. As you can observe, both rows are copied as-is to ClickHouse.
```

**Step 2** shows three operations on the users table: inserting a new row, updating an existing row, and deleting another row.

> **Step 3** shows how ClickPipes replicates the INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE operations to ClickHouse as versioned inserts. The UPDATE appears as a new version of the row with ID 2, while the DELETE appears as a new version of ID 1 with is _deleted marked as true. Because of this, ClickHouse has three additional rows compared to PostgreSQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 3** shows how ClickPipes replicates the INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE operations to ClickHouse as versioned inserts. The UPDATE appears as a new version of the row with ID 2, while the DELETE appears as a new version of ID 1 which is marked as true using `_is_deleted`. Because of this, ClickHouse has three additional rows compared to PostgreSQL.
```

As a result, running a simple query like `SELECT count(*) FROM users;` may produce different results in ClickHouse and PostgreSQL. According to the [ClickHouse merge documentation](/merges#replacing-merges), outdated row versions are eventually discarded during the merge process. However, the timing of this merge is unpredictable, meaning queries in ClickHouse may return inconsistent results until it occurs.

How can we ensure identical query results in both ClickHouse and PostgreSQL?

###  Deduplicate using FINAL Keyword {#deduplicate-using-final-keyword}

The recommended way to deduplicate data in ClickHouse queries is to use the [FINAL modifier.](/sql-reference/statements/select/from#final-modifier) This ensures only the deduplicated rows are returned.

Let's look at how to apply it to three different queries.

> _Note in the following queries the WHERE clause to filter out deleted rows._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Take note of the WHERE clause in the following queries, used to filter out deleted rows._
```

- **Simple count query**: Count the number of posts.

This is the simplest query you can run to check if the synchronization went fine. The two queries should return the same count.

```sql
-- PostgreSQL
SELECT count(*) FROM posts;

-- ClickHouse 

> SELECT count(*) FROM posts FINAL where _peerdb_is_deleted=0;

Reviewer: ```sql
SELECT count(*) 
FROM posts 
FINAL 
-- highlight-next-line
WHERE _peerdb_is_deleted=0;
```

This can be used to highlight within code blocks: https://docusaurus.io/docs/markdown-features/code-blocks#highlighting-with-comments

```

> -  **Simple aggregation with JOIN**: Top 10 users who cumulate the most number of views.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  **Simple aggregation with JOIN**: Top 10 users who have accumulated the most views.
```

An example of an aggregation on a single table. Having duplicates here would greatly affect the result of the sum function.

```sql
-- PostgreSQL 
SELECT
    sum(p.viewcount) AS viewcount,
    p.owneruserid as user_id,
    u.displayname as display_name
FROM posts p
LEFT JOIN users u ON u.id = p.owneruserid

> WHERE p.owneruserid > 0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- highlight-next-line
WHERE p.owneruserid > 0
```

GROUP BY user_id, display_name
ORDER BY viewcount DESC
LIMIT 10;

-- ClickHouse 
SELECT
    sum(p.viewcount) AS viewcount,
    p.owneruserid AS user_id,
    u.displayname AS display_name
FROM posts AS p
FINAL
LEFT JOIN users AS u
FINAL ON (u.id = p.owneruserid) AND (u._peerdb_is_deleted = 0)

> WHERE (p.owneruserid > 0) AND (p._peerdb_is_deleted = 0)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- highlight-next-line
WHERE (p.owneruserid > 0) AND (p._peerdb_is_deleted = 0)
```
